    #CPO Magazine » Feed

   CPO Magazine - News, Insights and Resources for Data Protection,
   Privacy and Cyber Security Leaders CPO Magazine - News, Insights and
   Resources for Data Protection, Privacy and Cyber Security Leaders
   CPO Magazine - News, Insights and Resources for Data Protection,
   Privacy and Cyber Security Leaders
     *
     *

   CPO Magazine - News, Insights and Resources for Data Protection,
   Privacy and Cyber Security Leaders CPO Magazine - News, Insights and
   Resources for Data Protection, Privacy and Cyber Security Leaders
   CPO Magazine - News, Insights and Resources for Data Protection,
   Privacy and Cyber Security Leaders
     * Home
     * News
     * Insights
     * Resources

     *
     *
     *
     *

   Skull icon with padlock icons showing the top 10 ransomware stories
   in 2019 Skull icon with padlock icons showing the top 10 ransomware
   stories in 2019 Skull icon with padlock icons showing the top 10
   ransomware stories in 2019
   Armor’s Top 10 Ransomware Stories of 2019 by Michael Mayes, Research
   Specialist at Armor
   Cyber SecurityInsights
   ·11 min read

Top 10 Ransomware Stories of 2019

   Michael Mayes·December 27, 2019
   TwitterFacebookLinkedIn

   As the year ends, it’s time to declare 2019 the Year of Ransomware
   Escalation. The proliferation of attacks and the move by threat
   actors to target large companies and public institutions in the US
   and abroad marks a turning point in the evolution of this digital
   scourge. Throughout 2018 ransomware volumes had been on the decline.
   Turns out hackers were only refining code, performing recon in
   networks, and preparing for the biggest attacks of this malware
   class since the worldwide Wannacry attacks of 2017.

   Armor published several threat intelligence reports this year
   concerning ransomware and was quoted frequently in the press. The
   following are our picks for the biggest ransomware stories of the
   year.

Baltimore Hit with Ransomware, Hacker Taunts City on Twitter

Tweets, Budget Woes, Pay-not-Pay

   On May 7 the city of Baltimore had a rude awakening in the form of a
   ransomware attack that infected city servers across multiple
   offices. It was the biggest attack on a city since Atlanta in 2018.
   Like Atlanta, Baltimore refused to pay ransom, at the time worth
   about $72,000 in bitcoin. And like Atlanta, which paid over $7
   million to fix its problem, Baltimore has budgeted a whopping $18.2
   million.

   During the initial days of the attack, Armor discovered a Twitter
   account that was used by the threat actor and reported on the
   hacker’s communication with city officials.

   “These recent tweets, apparently from the alleged City of Baltimore
   hacker(s) or their representative, are telling,” said Eric Sifford,
   a team member on the Armor Threat Resistance Unit. “The initial
   tweet from this Twitter account on May 12 included what looked to be
   usernames, passwords, and other sensitive-looking, internal
   documents from the City of Baltimore.  However, that tweet
   apparently failed to achieve the response the hacker(s) desired, as
   the newest tweets take things a step further.”   The tweet on May 25
   taunts and chastises the city’s Mayor for not paying the ransom.
   (See Image 2.)  The tweet on May 28 offers to decrypt one of the
   city’s computers for free if the Mayor sends hostnames of 5 affected
   machines. (See Image 3.)
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 1
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 1
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 1
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 1
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 2
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 2
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 2
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 2
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 3
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 3
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 3
   top-10-ransomware-stories-of-2019 image 3

   “It is clearly an effort by the hacker(s) to prove they can decrypt
   the city’s files,” continued Sifford. “This might be an opportunity
   for the Mayor and Baltimore’s incident responders to determine if
   the threat actors truly have the capabilities to unlock their data.
   As a cybersecurity expert, I generally recommend against paying a
   ransom; however, each case is unique in its totality, and I
   understand sometimes an organization’s leadership may decide their
   best option is to pay.”

   The Twitter profile contained “Robbinhood” in its profile name, a
   rare new ransomware strain that had infected Greenville, NC in
   April. The Tweets tagged Maryland State Senators, six City of
   Baltimore council members, various news outlets, and other city
   leaders.

   The Baltimore attack continued to make headlines throughout the year
   including the firing the IT director who allegedly warned the city,
   budget committees poaching funds from parks and recreation to pay
   for the fix, and the discovery of $5.6 million in unused funds since
   2007 that might have been used to reduce exposure. Baltimore’s
   plight is one every US city should pay attention to. They were just
   one of 82 cities and municipalities to publicly report being struck
   by ransomware this year.

   The Baltimore ransomware attack showed municipalities that the cost
   of a breach—and of not complying with demands—can be devasting to a
   city’s ability to conduct business and its maintenance of public
   trust. Unprocessed utility payments, dismissed court cases, and
   damaged real estate markets were just part of an estimated $8
   million in lost revenue attributed to the attack.

   But the cost to public confidence was immeasurable. Just a year
   earlier in March 2018, Baltimore suffered a cyberattack on its
   communications systems. Afterward, the city which saw four CIOs in
   five years failed to approve the information security manager’s
   recommendation for cyber insurance. By July 2018, new city CISO
   Frank Johnson presented a technology plan that provided little
   urgency for cybersecurity.

   Shortly after the May 2019 attack, Baltimore Mayor Jack Young urged
   the nation’s mayors to sign onto a pact they would never pay ransom,
   a pact they agreed to at an annual Mayor’s Conference in Hawaii
   last. Together 226 mayors voted in solidarity to deny cybercriminals
   payment if it came to their towns. According to the attendee list,
   the Mayors of Riviera Beach and Lake City, Florida did not attend
   the conference.

Lake City and Riviera Beach Florida Open Ransom Floodgates

   In Hollywood movies involving kidnappers, there are often
   oversimplifications and outright untruths. Schemes are always
   thwarted, victims are mostly returned, and criminals are taken into
   custody or eliminated to leave everyone with the morally
   comfortable, stand-your-ground feeling that “we don’t make deals
   with terrorists.”

   In reality we often do, and 2019 ransomware payments began to set
   new precedent. Though not new, cyber insurance would become more
   common and premiums would begin to grow. Publicly, ten high-profile
   victims in the US paid ransom in 2019 totaling $2.3 million. That
   number may not seem very substantial for an entire year but consider
   those are only numbers from publicly reported payouts. While
   Kaspersky estimates millions of attacks go unreported and the FBI
   investigated 1,493 cases in 2018, evidence suggests that many of the
   ransoms are paid by victims.

   Riviera Beach and Lake City, Florida were the first this year to
   report they had paid a six-figure ransom. Following attacks in May
   these small municipalities, made up of mostly retirees, had little
   recourse but to pay hackers. Riviera Beach paid $600,000 to decrypt
   communications systems and city servers.

   Lake City paid $460,000 through their insurance carrier, but
   unfortunately didn’t get the encryption keys they needed, a reminder
   that criminals can’t be trusted to always fulfill their end of the
   bargain.

   To put it in perspective, there are 19,429 municipalities in the US,
   with smaller cities operating on a council-manager form of
   governance, all sharing responsibility for the data of an estimated
   329 million people, and usually on a limited or degraded budget.

   Cyber insurance poses its own problem. Absence of reliable data to
   calculate premiums, lack of awareness among decision makers,
   misunderstandings about software vendor responsibilities, and
   invasive security evaluation procedures makes it impossible to
   value. Meanwhile, businesses and consumers witness thousands or
   breaches exposing hundreds of millions of records every year. These
   new attacks and their response from insurers could help raise
   awareness, just as they also increase the motivation for threat
   actors to continue. When attacks are coming from North Korea or
   Russia, businesses should ensure policies include “war provisions.”

The Texas 22 Reveals MSP Threat

   Among a cluster of Texas towns, the first multi-city ransomware
   attack occurred on August 17. It also revealed Managed Service
   Providers (MSPs) to be a new potential threat to business
   continuity. Twenty-two cities were attacked through TSM Consulting,
   an MSP that served multiple Texas municipalities. At first the
   attack was described as “coordinated” but it was soon revealed that
   the infection originated from the MSP.

   During the attack, however—and ever since—victims kept mostly silent
   about details surrounding the infection. Based on OSINT, days after
   the attack was reported, Armor identified 9 Texas cities or law
   enforcement groups that had become victims. One victim, the Graham
   County Police Department revealed they had received a $5 million
   ransom demand, the largest demand up to that point, and the second
   highest demand all year.

MSPs Infect Dentists, Veterinarians

   But the Texas 22 incident wouldn’t be the last attack on a critical
   MSP. It was the beginning of an escalation. Whether attacks were
   targets of opportunity, or well-planned attempts at creating
   untenable pain points to ensure payment, more of them followed. By
   December 1st, 19 MSPs had fallen victim to file and network
   encrypting malware in a series of one-to-many attacks that continues
   to reach hundreds of customers.

   PerCSoft, makers of the Digital Dental Record, a file storage
   solution serving over 700 dentists across the US was infected on
   August 24, shutting down patient records and billing features to
   over 400 dental offices. Another MSP to the dental industry, PM
   Consultants, went out of business after infecting hundreds of
   dentists in Washington and Oregon. Finally Complete Technology
   Solutions was attacked in November, the third MSP this year to
   impact dentist offices. The technology provider of network security,
   data backups and VoIP communication services saw an infection that
   impacted 100 of its customers.

   Other attacks through MSPs impacted accountants (INSYNQ, a
   QuickBooks provider), real estate agents (MetroList, serving 20,000
   realtors), payment processors (Billtrust), and law firms
   (TrialWorks). SmarterASP.net, a provider that hosts Microsoft’s
   ASP.NET open-source web framework for over 400,000 customers, was
   also attacked in November.

   “This uptick in successful ransomware attacks against MSPs and/or
   Cloud-Based Service Providers is a harsh reminder that organizations
   have to ensure that the third-party vendors they do business with
   are as equally protected against the current and emerging cyber
   threats, as they are,” said Chris Hinkley, Head of Armor’s Threat
   Resistance Unit (TRU)research team.  “This is especially true,
   because as we have seen, a successful ransomware attack against a
   MSP/Cloud-Based Service Provider can be debilitating to their
   customers, as well as to their own company, as the attack can
   quickly shut down key systems which the customers depend on to run
   their organization.”

School’s Out on Ransomware

   By the time many students returned to school this fall, ransomware
   was already teaching administrators a lesson. Schools in Arizona,
   Connecticut, and New York all delayed the first days of school due
   to ransomware. By December 1, a total of 72 US school districts have
   fallen victim to ransomware, impacting 867 individual schools and
   over 10,000 students.

   Most recently, 9 new school districts representing 98 individual
   schools have been attacked by ransomware just in November. They
   include:
     * Wood County Schools, Parkersburg, West VA
     * Port-Neches Grove Independent School District, Port Neches, TX
     * Penn-Harris-Madison School Corporation, Mishawaka, IN
     * Livingston New Jersey School District, Livingston, NJ
     * Chicopee Public Schools, Chicopee, MA
     * Claremont Unified School District, Claremont, CA
     * Sycamore School District 427, DeKalb, IL
     * Sunapee Middle High School, Sunapee, NH
     * Main School Administrative District #6, Buxton, ME

States of Emergency-Louisiana

   In 2007 Colorado was the first to declare a state of emergency due
   to a ransomware attack. Louisiana declared a state of emergency
   twice in 2019. Governor Bel Edwards first made the declaration in
   July when schools in New Orleans and the parishes of Tangipahoa,
   Morehouse, Quachita, and Sabine. He made the second declaration in
   November when the same ransomware strain Ryuk infected the
   Department of Public Safety, Office of Motor Vehicles, Department of
   Children and Family Services, the Louisiana Secretary of State, the
   Louisiana Public Service Commission, Louisiana Wildlife and
   Fisheries, and the Department of Health. The attack last month kept
   some systems down for more than two weeks. Initiating a state of
   emergency allowed states to call in state and federal resources
   including FEMA, the FBI, Homeland Security and the National Guard.

Georgia on Their Mind

   If Louisiana was a primary target, Georgia was a close second. This
   year ransomware attacks impacted Georgia’s Administrative Office of
   the Courts and Judicial Council as well as the Department of Public
   Safety, which included the Georgia State Patrol, the Georgia Capital
   Police and the Motor Carrier Compliance Division. All told, 30
   Magistrate Courts and 23 Municipal Courts were using systems
   victimized by the cyberattack. Seventeen probate courts were also
   impacted. It seems the state learned little from the March 2018
   ransomware attack on Atlanta that demanded $52,000 in bitcoin but
   cost the city an estimated $7 million to eventually fix.

Ransomware Killed the Radio Star

   This year 10 radio stations were knocked off the air in several
   states due to ransomware. Entercomm, the second largest radio group
   in the US, was attacked in September 2019, encrypting recorded
   programming and seizing communications. Radio station WWOW-A in
   Conneaut, Ohio was attacked with ransomware on October 5, knocking
   the station off the air for over a week. Max Media, which owns a
   network of radio stations in the U.S., had six Illinois radio
   stations fall victim to ransomware in September. Bicoastal Media in
   Portland, Oregon had five stations taken down at once October 21.

Déjà vu All Over Again

   Some cities were so unlucky (or unprepared) as to be hit multiple
   times. The Middletown School District in Connecticut was hit in 2018
   and again this year in May. The Daviess County Library in Owensboro,
   Kentucky was attacked this year in April and then again in July. The
   Lincoln County Sherriff in Lincolnton, North Carolina fell victim in
   both July and August. And the City of Cornelia, Georgia suffered
   attacks 3 times in 11 months. Recovery from an attack must include
   comprehensive forensic analysis to ensure the criminals don’t return
   following a successful attack.

Healthcare and the Unthinkable

   Healthcare organizations were a rich target in 2019. One report by
   Vanderbilt University even correlated  an uptick in fatal heart
   attacks at hospitals in the months and years following a cyberattack
   due to ransomware or data breaches. As of December, 43 healthcare
   organizations across the country have publicly reported attacks. The
   healthcare industry also holds the dubious honor of experiencing the
   largest ransom demand of the year—$14million—when Virtual Care
   Provider, Inc. of Milwaukee, Wisconsin was struck in November. The
   company, which owns 110 nursing and acute care facilities across the
   country, will not pay the ransom and fears it may go out of
   business.
   226 U.S. mayors agreed to a pact to deny cybercriminals payment if
   they come under #ransomware attacks. #respectdataClick to Tweet

   Pets weren’t spared either: National Veterinary Associates of Agoura
   Hills, California was struck by Ryuk in November. The attack was
   reported to have impacted 400 veterinarian offices across the
   country.

The New Digital Kidnappers

   As we enter a new decade, the problem of ransomware will likely only
   get worse thanks to the complexity, interconnectivity, and growing
   interdependence on connected devices and SaaS applications.
   Ransomware victims will face new challenges, ones rarely seen in the
   physical world, including cryptocurrencies that many victims don’t
   possess or even understand. New insurance models and third-party
   digital hostage negotiators will emerge. Companies will continue to
   struggle with the morality or business decision of paying ransom.
   And threat actors will continue to be located anywhere in the world,
   almost always escaping incarceration or imprisonment.


   TwitterFacebookLinkedIn

   Tags
   RansomwareU.S.
   Michael Mayes
   Research Specialist at Armor
   Michael Mayes is a research specialist with Armor, a global cloud
   security provider in Richardson, Texas. His work in technology
   communications includes the Human Genome Project, mobile software
   since the Palm an Pocket PC era, blockchain applications and
   cybersecurity. His work in digital black markets began in 2013 as a
   PhD student at the University of Memphis where he conducted research
   on “a new monetary ecosystem called Bitcoin” and its first
   real-world proof of concept, the Silk Road.

Latest

   Numbers on computer screen with Ukrainian flag color showing
   nation-state attacks due to Russia-Ukraine conflict Numbers on
   computer screen with Ukrainian flag color showing nation-state
   attacks due to Russia-Ukraine conflict Numbers on computer screen
   with Ukrainian flag color showing nation-state attacks due to
   Russia-Ukraine conflict

Russia-Ukraine Conflict Heightens Wariness of Nation-State Attacks as 64%
Of Businesses Believe They Have Been Targeted

   Mature woman team leader speaking to colleagues showing outsourced
   DPO Mature woman team leader speaking to colleagues showing
   outsourced DPO Mature woman team leader speaking to colleagues
   showing outsourced DPO

Is an Outsourced DPO Function the Answer?

   Board members discussing in boardroom about cyber attack
   preparedness Board members discussing in boardroom about cyber
   attack preparedness Board members discussing in boardroom about
   cyber attack preparedness

Majority of Board Members Feel Their Organization Is at Risk of a Cyber
Attack, but Almost Half Feel They Are Unprepared

   Siemens company sign hanging on a building showing encryption keys
   exposed in industrial devices Siemens company sign hanging on a
   building showing encryption keys exposed in industrial devices
   Siemens company sign hanging on a building showing encryption keys
   exposed in industrial devices

Hackers Can Extract Private Encryption Keys and Completely Takeover
Siemens Industrial Devices

   - Advertisement -

Learn More

   About
   Contact
   Our Advertising
   Privacy Policy
   Cookie Policy
   Terms of Use

Stay Updated

   CPO Magazine CPO Magazine CPO Magazine

   News, insights and resources for data protection, privacy and cyber
   security professionals.

Learn More

   About
   Contact
   Our Advertising
   Privacy Policy
   Cookie Policy
   Terms of Use
   Do Not Sell My Data

Stay Updated

Follow Us

   © 2022 Rezonen Pte. Ltd.

   CPO Magazine - News, Insights and Resources for Data Privacy,
   Protection and Cybersecurity Leaders CPO Magazine - News, Insights
   and Resources for Data Privacy, Protection and Cybersecurity Leaders
   CPO Magazine - News, Insights and Resources for Data Privacy,
   Protection and Cybersecurity Leaders

     * Home
     * News
     * Insights
     * Resources

   ____________________ (BUTTON)
   Start typing to see results or hit ESC to close
   U.S. Data Breach Regulations EU GDPR Facebook
   See all results
